This is a LibriVox recording.
All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to find out how you can volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
The Picture of Dorian Gray by Oscar Wilde.
CHAPTER VI
It was long past noon when he awoke.
His valet had crept several times into the room on tiptoe to see if he was stirring,
and had wondered what made his young master sleep so late.
Finally his bell sounded, and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea,
and a pile of letters on a small tray of gold-severate china, and drew back the olive
satin curtains with their shimmering blue lining that hung in front of the three tall windows.
"'Monsieur has slept well this morning,' he said, smiling.
"'What o'clock is it, Victor?' asked Dorian Gray sleepily.
"'One hour and a quarter, Monsieur.'
How late it was! He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over his letters. One was from
Lord Henry, and had been brought by hand that morning. He hesitated for a moment,
and then put it aside. The others he opened listlessly. They contained the usual collection
of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programs of charity concerts,
and the like, that are showered on fashionable young men every morning during the season.
There was a rather heavy bill for a chased-silver Louis Keane's toilet set that he had not yet had
the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely old-fashioned people,
and did not realize that we live in an age when only unnecessary things are absolutely
necessary to us. And there were several very courteously worded communications from German
street money-lenders offering to advance any sum of money at a moment's notice,
and at the most reasonable rates of interest.
After about ten minutes he got up, and, throwing on an elaborate dressing-gown,
passed into the onyx-paved bathroom. The cool water refreshed him after his long sleep.
He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through. A dim sense of having taken part in some
strange tragedy came to him once or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.
As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a light French breakfast
that had been laid out for him on a small round table close to an open window. It was an exquisite
day. The warm air seemed laden with spices, a bee flew in, and buzzed around the blue dragon bowl,
filled with sulfur-yellow roses that stood in front of him. He felt perfectly happy.
And suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of his portrait, and he started.
"'Too cold, monsieur?' asked his valet, putting an omelette on the table.
"'I shut the window.'
Dorian Chooker said. "'I am not cold,' he murmured. Was it all true? Had the portrait really changed?
Or had it been simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where there had been
a look of joy? Surely a painted canvas could not alter. The thing was absurd.
It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day. It would make him smile. And yet how vivid was
his recollection of the whole thing. First in the dim twilight, then in the bright dawn, he had seen
the touch of cruelty and the warped lips. He almost dreaded his valet leaving the room.
He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the portrait. He was afraid of certainty.
When the coffee and cigarettes had been brought and the man turned to go,
he felt a mad desire to tell him to remain. As the door closed behind him he called him back.
The man stood waiting for his orders. Dorian looked at him for a moment.
"'I am not home to anyone, Victor,' he said with a sigh. The man bowed and retired.
He rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on a luxuriously cushioned couch that
stood facing the screen. The screen was an old one of Spanish gilt leather, stamped and wrought with
rather florid Louis XIV pattern. He scanned it curiously, wondering if it had ever before
concealed the secret of a man's life. Should he move it aside, after all? Why not let it stay there?
What was the use of knowing? If the thing was true, it was terrible. If it was not true,
why trouble about it? But what if, by some fate or deadly a chance, other eyes than his spied behind
him saw the horrible change? What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at his
own picture? He would sure do that. No, the thing had to be examined at once. Anything would be
better than this dreadful state of doubt.' He got up and locked both doors. At least he would be
alone when he looked upon the mask of his shame. Then he drew the screen aside and saw himself
face to face. It was perfectly true. The portrait had altered. As he often remembered afterwards,
and always with no small wonder, he found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of
almost scientific interest. That such a change should have taken place was incredible to him,
and yet it was a fact. Was there some subtle affinity between the chemical atoms that
shaped themselves into form and colour on the canvas, and the soul that was within him?
Could it be that what that soul thought they realised? That what it dreamed they made true?
Or was there some other, more terrible reason? He shuddered and felt afraid,
and going back to the couch lay there, gazing at the picture in sickened horror.
One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him. It had made him conscious how unjust,
how cruel he had been to Sibyl Vane. It was not too late to make reparation for that. She could
still be his wife. His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would be
transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil Hallward had painted of him
would be a guide to him through life, would be to him what holiness was to some and conscience
was to others, and the fear of God to us all. There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could
lull the moral sense to sleep, but here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin.
Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.
Three o'clock struck, and four and half past four, but he did not stir. He was trying to
gather up the scarlet threads of his life and to weave them into a pattern, to find his way
through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was wandering. He did not know what to do
or what to think. Finally he went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl
he had loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness. He covered page
after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of pain. There is a luxury in self-reproach.
When we blame ourselves we feel that no one else has a right to blame us.
It is the confession, not the priest, that gives us absolution.
When Dorian Gray had finished the letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.
Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry's voice outside.
My dear Dorian, I must see you. Let me in at once. I can't bear you shutting yourself up like this.
He made no answer at first, but remained quite still. The knocking still continued and grew louder.
Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead,
to quarrel with him if it had become necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was inevitable.
He jumped up and drew the screen hastily across the picture and unlocked the door.
I am so sorry for it all, my dear boy, said Lord Henry, coming in,
but you must not think about it too much.
Do you mean Sibyl Vane? asked Dorian.
Yes, of course, answered Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly pulling his gloves off.
It is dreadful, from one point of view, but it was not your fault.
Tell me, did you go behind and see her after the play was over?
Yes, I felt sure you had. Did you make a scene with her?
I was brutal, Harry, perfectly brutal.
But it is all right now. I am not sorry for anything that has happened.
It has taught me to know myself better.
Oh, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way.
I was afraid I would find you plunged in remorse and tearing your nice hair.
I have got through all that, said Dorian, shaking his head and smiling. I am perfectly happy now.
I know what conscience is, to begin with.
It is not what you told me it was. It is the divinest thing in us.
Oh, don't sneer at it, Harry, any more. At least not before me.
I want to be good. I can't bear the idea of my soul being hideous.
A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian. I congratulate you on it.
But how are you going to begin?
By marrying Sibyl Vane.
Marrying Sibyl Vane? cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him in a perplexed amazement.
But, my dear Dorian, yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say.
Something dreadful about marriage. Don't say it. Don't ever say things of that kind to me again.
Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me. I am not going to break my word to her. She is to be my wife.
Your wife? Dorian, didn't you get my letter? I wrote to you this morning,
and sent the note down by my own man.
Your letter? Oh, yes, I remember. I have not read it yet, Harry.
I was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn't like.
Lord Henry walked across the room, and, sitting down by Dorian,
took both hands in his, and held them tightly.
Dorian, he said.
My letter?
Don't be frightened.
My letter was to tell you that Sibyl Vane is dead.
A cry of pain rose from the lad's lips, and he leapt to his feet,
tearing his hands away from Lord Henry's grasp.
Dead? Sibyl dead? It is not true. It is a horrible lie.
It is quite true, Dorian.
Said Lord Henry gravely.
It is in all the morning papers. I wrote down to you to ask you not to see anyone till I came.
There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must not be mixed up in it.
Things like that make a man fashionable in Paris, but in London people are so prejudiced.
Here one should never make one's debut with a scandal.
One should reserve that to give an interest to one's old age.
I don't suppose they know your name at the theatre. If they don't, it is all right.
Did anyone see you going round to her room? That is an important point.
Dorian did not answer for a few moments. He was dazed with horror.
Finally he murmured in a stifled voice.
Harry, did you say an inquest?
What did you mean by that?
Did Sibyl—oh,
Harry, I can't bear it. But be quick, tell me everything at once.
I have no doubt that it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put in that way to
the public. As she was leaving the theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so,
she said she had forgotten something upstairs. They waited some time for her, but she did not
come down again. They ultimately found her lying dead on the floor of her dressing-room.
She had swallowed something by mistake—some dreadful thing they use at theatres. I don't
know what it was, but it was either prusic acid or white lead in it. I should fancy it was prusic
acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously. It is very tragic, of course, but you must not
get yourself mixed up in it. I see by the standard that she was seventeen. I should have thought she
was almost younger than that. She looks such a child, and seemed to know so little about acting.
Dorian, you mustn't let this thing get on your nerves. You must come and dine with me,
and afterwards we'll go in at the opera. It is a patty-night, and everyone will be there.
You can come to my sister's box. She has got some smart women with her.
So I have murdered Sibyl Vane, said Dorian Gray, half to himself,
murdered her as certainly as if I had cut her little throat with a knife.
And the roses are not less lovely for all that. The birds sing just as happily in my garden,
and tonight I am to dine with you, and then go on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose,
afterwards. How extraordinarily dramatic life is!
If I had read all this in a book, Harry, I think I would have wept over it.
Somehow, now that it has happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.
Here is the first passionate love letter I have ever written in my life.
Strange that my first passionate love letter should have been addressed to a dead girl.
Can they feel, I wonder, those silent people we call the dead?
Sibyl? Can she feel, or know, or listen? Oh, Harry, how I loved her once!
It seems years ago to me now. She was everything to me. Then came that dreadful night. Was it
really only last night, when she played so badly and my heart almost broke? She explained it all
to me. It was terribly pathetic. But I was not moved a bit. I thought her shallow.
Then something happened that made me afraid. I can't tell you what it is, but it was awful.
I said I would go back to her. I felt I had done wrong, and now she is dead.
My God! My God! Harry, what shall I do? You don't know the danger I am in, and there is nothing to
keep me straight. She would have done that for me. She had no right to kill herself. It was selfish
of her. My dear Dorian, the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so
completely that he loses all interest in life. If you had married this girl you would have been
wretched. Of course you would have treated her kindly. One can always be kind to people about
whom one cares nothing. But she would have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent
to her, and when a woman finds that out about her husband she either becomes dreadfully dowdy
or wears some very smart bonnets that some other woman's husband has to pay for.
I say nothing about the social mistake, but I assure you that in any case
the whole thing would have been an absolute failure.
I suppose it would, muttered the lad, walking up and down the room and looking horribly pale.
But I thought it was my duty. It is not my fault that this terrible tragedy had prevented my
doing what was right. I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good resolutions,
that they are always made too late. Mine certainly were. Good resolutions are simply
a useless attempt to interfere with scientific laws. Their origin is pure vanity. Their result
is absolutely nil. They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions
that have a certain charm for us. That is all that can be said for them.
Harry? cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him.
Why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to?
I don't think I am heartless, do you?
You've done too many foolish things in your life to be entitled to give yourself
that name, Dorian, answered Lord Henry, with his sweet melancholy smile.
The lad frowned.
I don't like that explanation, Harry, he rejoined. But I am glad you don't think I am heartless.
I am nothing of that kind. I know I am not. And yet I must admit that this thing that has
happened does not affect me as it should. It seems to me to be simply like a wonderful
ending to a wonderful play. It is all the terrible beauty of a great tragedy, a tragedy
in which I took part, but by which I have not been wounded.
It is an interesting question, said Lord Henry, who found an exquisite pleasure in playing on the
unconscious egotism. An extremely interesting question. I fancy that the explanation is this.
It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an inartistic manner
that they hurt us by their cruel violence, their absolute incoherence,
their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of style.
They affect us just as vulgarity affects us. They give us an impression of sheer brute force,
and we revolt against that. Sometimes, however, a tragedy that has artistic elements of beauty
crosses over our lives. If these elements of beauty are real, the whole thing simply appeals
to our sense of dramatic effect. Suddenly we find that we are no longer the actors,
but the spectators of the play, or rather we are both. We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of
the spectacle enthralls us. In the present case, what is it that has really happened?
Someone has killed herself for love of you. I wish I had ever had such an experience.
It would have made me in love with love for the rest of my life. The people who have adored me—there
have not been very many, but there have been some—have always insisted on living on, long
after I ceased to care for them, or they to care for me. They become stout and tedious,
and when I meet them they go in at once for reminiscences. That awful memory of woman,
what a fearful thing it is, and what an utter intellectual stagnation it reveals.
One should absorb the colour of life, but one should never remember its details.
Details are always vulgar. Of course now and then things linger. I once wore nothing but violets all
and wore through one season, as mourning for a romance that would not die. Ultimately, however,
it did die. I forget what killed it. I think it was her proposing to sacrifice the whole world
for me. That is always a dreadful moment. It fills one with a terror of eternity.
Well, would you believe it, a week ago at Lady Hampshire's I found myself seated at dinner
next the lady in question. And she insisted on going over the whole thing again, and digging
up the past and raking up the future. I had buried my romance in a bed of poppies. She dragged it out
again and assured me that I had spoiled her life. I am bound to state that she ate an enormous dinner,
so I did not feel any anxiety. But what a lack of taste she showed.
The one charm of the past is that it is the past. But women never know when the curtain
has fallen. They always want a sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over
they propose to continue it. If they were allowed to have their way, every comedy would have a
tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in a farce. They are charmingly artificial,
but they have no sense of art. You are more fortunate than I am. I assure you, Dorian,
that not one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane did for you.
Ordinary women always console themselves. Some of them do it by going in for sentimental colours,
never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over 35 who is fond
of pink ribbons. It always means they have a history. Others find a great consolation in
suddenly discovering the good qualities of their husbands. They flaunt their conjugal felicity in
one's face, as if it was the most fascinating of sins. Religion console some. Its mysteries
have all the charm of a flotation, a woman once told me. I can quite understand it. Besides,
nothing makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner. There is really no end to the
consolations that women find in modern life. Indeed, I have not mentioned the most important
one of all. What is that, Harry? said Dorian, listlessly. Oh, the obvious one. Taking someone
else's admirer when one loses one's own. In good society that always whitewashes a woman.
But really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the women one meets.
There is something to me quite beautiful about her death. I am glad I am living in a century
when such wonders happen. They make one believe in the reality of the things that shallow fashioner
people play with, such as romance, passion and love. I was terribly cruel to her, you forget that.
I believe that women appreciate cruelty more than anything else. They have wonderfully primitive
instincts. We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters all the
same. They love being dominated. I am sure you were splendid. I have never seen you angry,
but I can fancy how delightful you looked. And, after all, you said something to me the day
before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be mere fanciful, but that I see now
was absolutely true, and it explains everything. What was that, Harry? You said to me that Sibyl
Vane represented to you all the heroines of romance. That she was Desdemona one night and
Ophelia the other. That if she died as Juliet she came to life as Imogen.
She will never come to life again now, murmured the lad, burying his face in his hands. No,
she will never come to life. She has played her last part. But you must think of that lonely death
in the tawdry dressing-room simply as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobian tragedy,
as a wonderful scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Touranet.
The girl never really lived, and so she has never really died.
To you, at least, she was always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare's plays
and left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare's music sounded richer
and more full of joy. The moment she touched actual life she marred it, and it marred her,
and so she passed away. Mourn for Ophelia, if you like. Put ashes on your head because
Cordelia was strangled. Cry out against heaven because the daughter of Brabantio died.
But don't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane. She was less real than they are.
There was a silence. The evening darkened in the room. Noiselessly, and with silver feet,
the shadows crept in from the garden. The colours faded warily out of things.
At some time Dorian looked up.
You have explained to me myself, Harry, he murmured, with something of a sigh of relief.
I felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it,
and I could not express it to myself. How well you know me.
But we will not talk again of what has happened. It has been a marvellous experience. That is all.
I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as marvellous.
Life has everything in store for you, Dorian. There is nothing that you,
with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do.
But, suppose, Harry, I become haggard and grey and wrinkled. What then?
Ah, then, said Lord Henry, rising to go, then, my dear Dorian, you would have to fight for your
victories. As it is, they are brought to you. No, you must keep your good looks. We live in
an age that reads too much to be wise, and thinks too much to be beautiful. We cannot spare you.
Now you had better dress and drive down to the club. We are rather late, as it is.
I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry. I feel too tired to eat anything.
What is the number of your sister's box? Twenty-seven, I believe. It is on the grand
tier. You will see her name on the door. But I am sorry you won't come and dine.
I don't feel up to it, said Dorian, warily. But I am awfully obliged to you for all that
you have said to me. You are certainly my best friend. No one has ever understood me as you have.
We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian, answered Lord Henry, shaking him by the
hand. Good-bye. I shall see you before nine-thirty, I hope. Remember, Patty is singing.
As he closed the door behind him, Dorian touched the bell, and in a few minutes Victor appeared
with lamps and drew the blinds down. He waited impatiently for him to go. The man seemed to take
an interminable time about everything. As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew
it back. No, there was no further change in the picture. It had received the news of Sybil Vane's
death before he had known it himself. It was conscious of the events of life as they occurred.
The vicious cruelty that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the very
moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was. Or was it indifferent to results?
Did it merely take cognizance of what had passed within the soul, he wondered,
and hoped that some day he would see the change taking place before his very eyes,
shuddering as he hoped it? Poor Sybil! What a romance it had all been! She had often mimicked
death on the stage, and at last death himself had touched her, and brought her with him.
How had she played that dreadful scene? Had she cursed him as she died? No. She had died for love
of him, and love would always be a sacrament to him now. She had atoned for everything by the
sacrifice she had made of her life. He would not think any more of what she had made him go through
that horrible night to the theatre. When he thought of her, it would be a wonderful tragic
figure to show love had been a great reality. A wonderful tragic figure!
Tears came to his eyes as he remembered her childlike look, and winsome, fanciful ways,
and shy, tremulous grace. He wiped them away hastily, and looked again at the picture.
He felt that the time had really come for making his choice. Or had his choice already been made?
Yes, life had decided that for him. Life and his own infinite curiosity about life.
Eternal youth, infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder sins.
He was to have all these things. The portrait was to bear the burden of his shame. That was all.
A feeling of pain came over him as he thought of the desecration that was in store for the
fair face on the canvas. Once, in boyish mockery of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss,
those painted lips that now smiled so cruelly at him. Morning after morning he had sat before
the portrait, wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it as it seemed to him at times.
Was it to alter now with every mood to which he yielded? Was it to become a hideous and
loathsome thing? To be hidden away in a locked room? To be shut out from the sunlight that
so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of the hair? The pity of it! The pity of
it! For a moment he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that existed between him and
the picture might cease. It had changed in an answer to a prayer, perhaps it might remain
unchanged. And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would surrender the chance of remaining
always young, however fantastic that chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be
fraught? Besides, was it really under his control? Had it indeed been prayer that had produced the
substitution? Might there not be some curious scientific reason for it all? If thought could
exercise its influence upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon
dead and inorganic things? Nay, without thought or conscious desire might not things external to
themselves vibrate in unison with our moods and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love
or in secret affinity? But the reason was of no importance. He would never again tempt by a prayer
any terrible power. If the picture was to alter, it was to alter. That was all. Why inquire too
closely into it? For there would be a real pleasure in watching it. He would be able to
follow his mind into its secret places. This portrait would be to him the most magical of
mirrors. As it had revealed to him his own body, so it would reveal to him his own soul.
And when winter came upon it, he would still be standing where spring trebles on the verge of
summer. When the blood crept from its face and left behind a pallid mask of chalk with
leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood. Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade.
Not one pulse of his life would ever weaken. Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be strong
and fleet and joyous. What did it matter what happened to the coloured image on the canvas?
He would be safe. That was everything.
He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture, smiling as he did so,
and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was already waiting for him. An hour later
he was at the opera, and Lord Henry was leaning over his chair.
End of chapter 6 of the picture of Dorian Gray